Judy, first of all, who has the upper hand, Russia or Ukraine?

As a leader, I'm not willing to consider this. All we want to do and what we want to see is to end this battle with peace, whether it be Mr. Putin, whether it be Mr. Zelenskyy. I have always requested and recommended this. This is a conflict that ended up in casualties. The people are dying, and nobody will be winning at the end of the day.

And that's not what we're looking for.

Most importantly, Russian attitude will be very, very important here.

In Uzbekistan, I got together with President Putin, and we had very extensive discussions with him. And he is actually showing me that he's willing to end this as soon as possible. That was my impression, because the way things are going right now are quite problematic; 200 hostages will be exchanged upon an agreement between the parties.

I think a significant step will be taken forward.

No, and undoubtedly no.

When we talk about reciprocal agreement, this is what we mean. If a peace is going to be established in Ukraine, of course, the returning of the land that was invaded will become really important. This is what is expected. This is what is wanted. Mr. Putin has taken certain steps. We have taken certain steps.

The lands which were invaded will be returned to Ukraine.

Since 2014, we have been talking to my dear friend Putin about this, and this is what we have requested from him.

We asked him to return Crimea to its rightful owners. These are our descendants at the same time, the people who are living there. If you were to take this step forward, if you could leave us, you would also be relieving the Crimean Tatars and Ukraine as well. That's what we have always been saying.

But since then, unfortunately, no step has been taken forward.

No leader in the aftermath would say that it was a mistake. Nobody will say, yes, I made a mistake.

The same thing can be applied to Ukraine as well. Mr. Zelenskyy, do you think when he was moving forward, does he feel he made a mistake? The leaders, when they take a path, they will find it very difficult to go back? It's very difficult for the leaders to go back.

Well, no invasion can be justified. An invasion cannot be justified.

About this issue, the most ideal answer could be given as a result of the activities taken by the United Nations.

With the activities of the United Nations, a light should be shared on these discussions. If that doesn't happen, as a leader of a country, it will be difficult for me to explain these issues, come up with a statement, or else it will bring us to our position as a country that does not follow a balanced foreign policy.

We cannot hold sides. We cannot take sides. And it wouldn't be right for us to do that.

If an investigation leads to that conclusion, Putin will show his reaction. It's not right to observe Putin as an entirely different person because he is prioritizing the interests of his country and he's fighting for his interests, for his country's interests.

Right now, in the battle between these two countries, we are talking comprehensively with Putin. At the same time, we are talking comprehensively with Zelenskyy. And, at the same time, we are talking comprehensively with Guterres. And Guterres is actually talking to all the parties involved.

If we are going to reach a conclusion, we are not going to reach that conclusion by taking sides. We are not going to defend a single leader. But, instead, we have to be looking for a conclusion that will satisfy all parties involved.

Judy, we have to see this for what it is. Not only the Ukrainians are dying, but there are so many casualties on the Russian side as well.

That's a different fact. Yes, it was done.

But prior to the breaking out of this conflict, many things had happened. And with the conflict, things have unfolded tremendously. And now we are seeing a certain amount of diminishing casualties. The U.N. has to reach a conclusion as soon as possible. And upon that conclusion, we will be able to put forward our stance for what it is.

That's why we are taking steps forward, in order to sort out this hostage crisis. And, at the same time, we are taking necessary steps forward in order to allow Ukrainian grain to leave the ports. And we reached a certain level. So it's not about pushing one person to the one side entirely and defending the other. This is not how we will cultivate results.

Here especially, Sweden has been a cradle for terrorism. And the terrorists have infiltrated all the way into their parliaments.

And, in Stockholm, we see terrorists are demonstrating all the time. The banners, the poster of the leader of the terrorist organizations are abound. They are demonstrating. They're throwing slogans. And they're attacking the innocent Turkish descendants in Stockholm. And we have given all the evidence relevant to these developments to our Swedish interlocutors.

Finland, on the other hand, they're not like Sweden. They're a bit more calm, and they have more control over the developments. But Sweden is not like that. They're always using certain reasons. They're always using certain excuses. They always talk about the Constitution. And, as the reigning principle of the Constitution, they value the freedom of expression.

And, in return, I say terrorism has nothing to do with the freedom of expression. And the Turkish Parliament is the eventual decision-maker.

We have no concerns about winning the elections. Nobody will replace us, because there is no alternative.

Well, these are common things. They happen all the time.

There is losing by a great extent and there is not winning. But we are currently in such a position that we will be able to be triumphant.

I can't say that our relations are ideal. Why? Because our trade volume with the United States is not supposed to be where it is today.

And in the defense industry, we are not at the level that we desire. For example, we have the outstanding issue of F-16s. We have procured F-16s from the United States. But, instead, certain political decisions are being made, resulting in the imposition of sanctions upon Turkey. This is not very becoming of two friendly countries such as the U.S. and Turkey.

We have spoken to the Republicans, and we have received the support of the Republicans. If we can't get the results out of the United States about the F-16s, what are we going to do? Of course, we're going to take care of our own selves.

I can say very clearly that I do not find the attitude of the West, no need to mention names, to be correct, because it is a policy based on provocations

As long as you try to wage such a war of provocations, you will not be able to get the needed result

As Turkey, we have always maintained a policy of balance between Ukraine and Russia. From now on, we will continue to follow that balanced policy

He (Vladimir Putin) is actually showing me that he's willing to end this as soon as possible. That was my impression because the way things are going right now is quite problematic.

If peace is going to be established in Ukraine, of course, returning the land that was invaded will become really important. This is what is expected, no invasion can be justified

asked (Putin) to return Crimea to its rightful owners.

200 hostages will be exchanged upon an agreement

Turkey is determined to use the authority given by the Montreux Convention on Turkish Straits in a manner to prevent escalation of the Russia-Ukraine crisis

Of course we will continue all these discussions for the sake of not interrupting diplomacy

Mr. President, hello.  I would like to especially mention that it gives me great — Mr. President, it gives me great pleasure to be able to get together with you after a long interval. 

And this NATO Summit that we’re attending, in terms of its agenda, is going to be quite busy and it’s going to be quite important.  And tomorrow, the activities will be sustained.  And thanks to our efforts, we believe that we will be able to go back to our countries with our hands full and with full satisfaction.

And as the United States, we think your pioneering in this regard is going to be crucial in terms of strengthening NATO for the future, and it’s going to have a very positive contribution to the process between Ukraine and Russia. 

The Russia and Ukraine conflict and the negative developments with regards to taking out of the grain from the Ukrainian ports, as well as the developments involving oil and natural gas, require all of us to work together in order to settle the disputes once and for all. 

I hope and pray that we will be able to establish a balance to diplomacy in order to cultivate positive results, especially with regards to the grain.  There are countries deprived of the grains, and we will open corridors, and we will allow them to have access to the grains that they so need. 

Together, we need to find a reasonably practical diplomatic solution that will give both sides a dignified way out of the crisis

We will continue to increase our efforts to end the war that has flared up again in recent days on the basis of Ukraine's territorial integrity and independence

I invite international organizations and all countries to give sincere support to Turkey's efforts.

Abroad, we will continue to pursue our policies by always preserving our honourable stance wherever there is an oppressed person from Syria to Iraq, from Libya to Karabakh, from the Balkans to Africa, from the Black Sea to the Mediterranean,

“We don’t want to experience another Chernobyl"

While continuing our efforts to find a solution, we remain on the side of our Ukraine friends

We discussed the exchange of prisoners of war and our initiatives in this regard

We will continue to talk about that with Mr. Putin.

“If peace is to be established in Ukraine, of course, the return of the attacked territory will be very important. This is expected, this is required. Putin has taken steps, so have we. The invaded territories will be returned,

No leader will say after the fact that it was a mistake, that he was wrong

Turkey is a NATO member and will continue to be so and this is very critical for Turkey

The NATO alliance is one thing and Turkey’s relation with Russia is something else. They need to be seen as two separate things. Russia is our neighbor and we need maintain good ties. Turkey’s neutrality policy over Ukraine is to the benefit of NATO

As long as terrorist organizations demonstrate on Swedish streets and terrorists are present in their parliament, our approach to the issue will not be positive

The dynamics have changed

Turkey no longer feels a strong and firm member of the Western camp or NATO alliance. It is still NATO, but obviously also interested in having alternatives. And Turkey is also a whole lot more self-confident than it used to be.

"In Uzbekistan, I got together with (Russian) President (Vladimir) Putin, and we had very extensive discussions with him,

I think a significant step will be taken forward." "All what we want to see is to end this battle with peace

We should intensify our diplomatic efforts for a long-lasting ceasefire,

We have strongly emphasised the message that we expect genuine solidarity from our allies, not only in words but also in action

“If they fulfil their duties, we will send it to the parliament. If they are not fulfilled, it is out of the question,

Judy, first of all, who has the upper hand, Russia or Ukraine?

As a leader I'm not willing to consider this.

All we want to do and what we want to see is to end this battle with peace

whether it be Mr Putin, whether it be Mr. Zelenskyy,

I have always requested and recommended this.

This is a conflict that ended up in casualties.

The people are dying

and nobody will be winning at the end of the day.

And that's not what we're looking for.

 probably the only leader in the world who can easily talk with both Putin and Zelensky

“We can have an opportunity to discuss both bilateral issues and the Ukrainian war if we can meet,

There are alternatives in the world. There are so many countries in the world that can supply our needs if the U.S. rejects our demand, just like we had to buy the S-400 systems [from Russia] after it did not give us the Patriots.

We have a strategic partnership with Ukraine in addition to our deep-rooted, multidimensional and close relations. Also, we attach importance to being in a constructive dialogue with Russia, another neighbor of ours, on the basis of mutual trust. We are in close contact with both countries with a view to putting an immediate end to the war.

“We are going through a period in which not only the security architecture of Europe but also the global perception of security has been changing. Today, it has been a month since the Ukraine-Russia war began. We as NATO allies have come together at leaders’ level to address both the recent developments and the measures the Alliance has taken in the current security environment.

TÜRKİYE’S STRONG SUPPORT FOR UKRAINE’S TERRITORIAL INTEGRITY AND SOVEREIGNTY IS KNOWN BY EVERYONE

It is noteworthy that NATO has once again given messages of unity and solidarity after the virtual summit on February 25. Türkiye’s strong support for Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty since 2014 is known by everyone. We have stated at every opportunity that we never have and never will recognize Crimea’s annexation, and we continue to do so. On the occasion of the summit, I once again strongly reiterated our support for Ukraine’s territorial integrity. Our stance on Russia’s attack on Ukraine is clear and consistent with this principled policy of ours. The destruction and humanitarian tragedy caused by the war are evident. The war-torn cities, hospitals, schools and houses that have nearly turned into wrecks, and weeping refugees, who packed all their assets in one suitcase, have all reminded us once again of the bitter face of wars

Both Russia and Ukraine are our neighbors in the Black Sea. We have a strategic partnership with Ukraine in addition to our deep-rooted, multidimensional and close relations. Also, we attach importance to being in a constructive dialogue with Russia, another neighbor of ours, on the basis of mutual trust. Türkiye, as a country which has been carrying the burden of the war in Syria almost alone for the past 11 years, work in order for peace to prevail in the region. We are in close contact with both countries with a view to putting an immediate end to the war. We closely follow and support the negotiations between the parties.

“We have thus far taken many steps to facilitate the negotiation process. Us bringing together the Foreign Ministers in Antalya and the talks our Minister of Foreign Affairs held in Moscow and Lviv were each a turning point. We believe that the final solution should be based on a reliable formula to be accepted by both countries and the international community.”

We are cautiously optimistic about the progress made in certain points at the negotiations. Since the beginning of the war we have been using the authority given our country by the Montreux Convention in a manner to ease the tension in the Black Sea

We have thus far delivered 56 truckloads of humanitarian aid to the region, and continue to send new ones. We have helped more than 63 thousand foreign nationals, including the Ukrainians, leave the zones of conflict. The number of the Ukrainians who have come to Türkiye, on the other hand, has neared 60 thousand. We will continue to send these humanitarian aids to Ukraine and its neighbors from now on as well. Both our governmental institutions, such as AFAD and Turkish Red Crescent (Kızılay), and non-governmental organizations work selflessly on the ground. I hereby thank all our institutions that represent our nation’s generosity and spirit of solidarity despite all kinds of risks and threats. Also, we have evacuated 142 officials of OSCE’s Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine via Istanbul. We as a country which has been hosting the most refugees in the world, namely nearly 5 million refugees, for the past 8 years perfectly understand the difficult situation our friends are in

What is more, we know from the bitter experiences of the past that the international community has failed to properly protect refugees. We are deeply saddened that desperate people, forced to leave their homes and lands, are discriminated against because of their eye color, language, belief, or culture

We have exchanged comprehensive views as to how the Alliance can respond to the threats against Euro-Atlantic security,

NATO must act with a realistic and strategic approach while continuing its political and practical support to Ukraine in the current climate of war. The decisions we have made during the summit wholly consist of steps to strengthen NATO’s structure of deterrence and defense. Thus, we have underlined once again that the Alliance is not in a structuring that may pose a threat to Russia or any other third country. As measures are being taken to effectively protect the allies in the face of possible conflicts and crises, I have especially highlighted the importance of the principle of indivisibility of security. I underscored that the 360-degree security is the fundamental principle. I once again expressed to our allies our national security priorities and concerns, including the fight against terror.

“Türkiye will continue to make the necessary contributions to NATO’s deterrence and defense measures on the basis of the spirit of Alliance. We expect the same solidarity from our allies as well. While the successes of the Turkish defense industry products are plain as day, there can be no reasonable justification for the obstruction we are faced with in this area. The lifting of some of the restrictions placed on our defense industry by some of our allies in particular will be to our mutual benefit. Overt/covert embargos or restrictions should not even be brought up among allies or discussed, let alone implementing them. I clearly shared with leaders our expectations with regard to this matter.”

A summit is being planned in Madrid, where decision that will shape the future of the Alliance, and carry NATO to the next decades will be made. Surely, the new Strategic Concept of NATO will stand out in these decisions. Türkiye, with its contributions to this process, has a say in the future of the Alliance as has been the case for NATO’s past and present. You know very well what an intense diplomatic traffic we have conducted since the outbreak of the war. I have held intensive talks with most of the world leaders. I have kept in close contact and exchanged views with many of my counterparts.

“Today, in addition to my usual contacts, I have held bilateral talks with President Emmanuel Macron of France, who also holds the Presidency of the Council of the European Union, Prime Minister Mario Draghi of Italy, Prime Minister Kaja Kallas of Estonia, Prime Minister Boris Johnson of the United Kingdom, and with other heads of state and government that participated in the Summit. During these talks, we have mainly discussed the developments in Ukraine. Also, we have exchanged views within the framework of our bilateral agendas. I once again shared with the leaders of the European Union our expectations regarding the revitalization of our accession process, the initiation of negotiations to update of the Customs Union, making institutional cooperation mechanisms functional again, providing flexibility in the visa liberalization process, and giving Türkiye the place it deserves in the common defense and security structures developed by the Union

Introducing such reforms is a requirement of our responsibility towards not only the people who have lost their lives in crises, but also towards our children. We will continue to recall that ‘the world is bigger than 5’ for the peace and security of the entire humanity as well as our own citizens. Türkiye, who marks the 70th anniversary of its membership in NATO, has the resolve and determination for the establishment and preservation of peace and stability in its region with both its diplomatic and military power

We will continue our talks with both Mr. Putin and Mr. Zelensky from now on as well. All our efforts aim to create an atmosphere of peace by bringing together the two leaders. As is known, there is almost a consensus regarding such issues as NATO, disarmament, collective security and using Russian as official language in the technical infrastructure works during the ongoing process in Belarus. However, there is the issue of Crimea and Donbass, which is impossible for Ukraine to consent to. I think Mr. Zelensky has displayed wise leadership with an understanding to take the issue to referendum by saying ‘That is a decision that must be made by the entire Ukrainian people

This is Mr. Zelensky’s demand which he has made during our talks. Also he personally wants Türkiye to assume an intermediary role. It is out of the question that Russia disagrees with that. During the meeting between the foreign ministers, a positive approach was displayed regarding this issue. It is our wish that a leaders’ level meeting will be held. And should there be such a demand or proposal, we have already said that we stand ready for such a step by holding a meeting in Ankara, or Istanbul, or another city of ours

Ours has always been a policy of peace. That is so because there is no win but loss in all the methods other than the policy of peace. As a matter of fact, the current situation confirms this,

Apparently, most of the NATO countries act mainly through sanctions. Because, almost all the leaders think that methods other than sanctions would not work. Therefore, the same spirit prevails in the final communiqué.

As Türkiye we by no means approve of the Aegean and the Mediterranean being soiled with human blood, tears or hostilities. We wholeheartedly want peace and tranquility. We want stability and security in our region as well as in our homeland. We want to settle our disputes through dialogue on the basis of international law and in accordance with justice. We have always argued that we neither violate anyone’s rights, nor let anyone violate our own. We by no means hesitate to defend till the end our nation’s and our Turkish Cypriot brothers and sisters’ interests in the Blue Homeland

“Not only our region, but the whole world is grappling with very serious crises, from terror, conflicts, food and drought to increasing animosity towards Islam and foreigners and to the climate change. Wherever we look at, wherever we turn our face to, we come across with a ring of fire. While the health dimension of the pandemic has been left behind, its destruction in the global economy is coming to light each passing day. Although the economic balance sheet of the pandemic has yet to be seen, everything has become intertwined with the Russia-Ukraine war. In fact, many countries, from America to Europe, are fighting against the highest inflation rates of the last 4-5 decades. All living in those countries know well the huge difference between the announced figures and the real inflation rates.

Türkiye is the only country that sincerely works and endeavors to bring an end to the war and that makes every effort to that end. Both bringing the warring countries together around the negotiation table and the opening of the grain corridor and the diplomatic success we have achieved in the exchange of prisoners of war are the most concrete examples of these efforts

Even though those who consider Türkiye as a guardian of their own interests are annoyed by this new state of affairs, we manage this process in a Türkiye-centered manner. As the government, we reject impositions not only in internal affairs but also in foreign policy

I once again explained our views on issues concerning international peace and security, particularly the Russia-Ukraine crisis, to the whole world in my speech there. I drew attention to Türkiye’s mediating role in its region and across the world with many examples ranging from migration crisis to grain shipment. I openheartedly explained our country’s approaches to a wide range of issues including the fight against terror, the developments in the Eastern Mediterranean and the Aegean, economic inequities and the UN’s structure. During our meetings and bilateral talks, I witnessed that our efforts aimed at restoring peace between Russia and Ukraine are particularly appreciated.

While endeavoring sincerely to end wars, crises and tensions in the world, we closely follow our neighbor Greece’s policies full of provocation. As I always say, Greece is not and cannot be our equivalent or counterpart in political, military and economic terms. We are well aware that the real intentions of those who provoke and unleash Greek politicians against us are to hinder our programme of building up a great and powerful Türkiye by distracting our country’s time, energy and attention. However, it is a dangerous game both for Greek politicians, the Greek state and the Greek people and for those who use them as a puppet

As Türkiye, we are displaying our will also in tackling the shocks caused
by the Russia-Ukraine war, alongside the pandemic and climate change
processes.
Since the first day of the conflict in Ukraine, which has now completed its
seventh month, we have acted with the understanding that "war has no
winners, a just peace has no losers".
Today, we still keep emphasizing the key role of dialogue and diplomacy
in resolving the current crisis.
Through the facilitating role we have assumed with this understanding, we
brought the Parties together, first at the Antalya Diplomacy Forum, and
then in Istanbul.
As a result of the intensive efforts we carried out together with the
Secretary General, we made sure that the Ukrainian grain was able to
reach the world through the Black Sea.
Now that almost two months have gone by after the Istanbul Memorandum
of Understanding which enabled this achievement, we are pleased to note
that these shipments gain momentum day by day.
This memorandum, which bears critical importance in ensuring the
sustainability of grain supply, is one of the greatest achievements of the
United Nations in recent years.
Trust in the United Nations by those around the world who seek help from
the international community has been reinvigorated, thanks to this
achievement.
The Istanbul Memorandum of Understanding has also proved that
negotiations do yield results on issues which are of vital importance to the
parties.
A similar approach can also be displayed regarding the crisis at the
Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Station, which concerns the safety of the
entire humanity.

We will continue to increase our efforts to end the war, which has been
reignited in recent days, based on the territorial integrity and
independence of Ukraine.
I hereby call upon international organizations and all countries to provide
genuine support to Türkiye's efforts towards establishing a lasting peace.
We need to find together a reasonable, just and viable diplomatic solution
that will provide both sides the opportunity of an “honourable exit”.
On the other hand, all these disasters which have caused grievance to
millions of people, have once again reminded all of us our responsibility to
display further efforts towards the embodiment of an effective
multilateralism by the United Nations.
It is imperative that we restructure the United Nations as an organization
worthy of its inclusive character, capable of producing solutions for a fairer
world order, and in which a common will is displayed on behalf of the entire
humanity.
In particular, enabling the Security Council with a more effective,
democratic, transparent and accountable structure and functioning will be
an important milestone in the pursuit of peace, justice and welfare of the
entire humanity.

Although we have some differences of opinion over the issues concerning our national security, we share similar attitudes in many regional and global matters. During our talks with President Biden, we have agreed on strengthening and deepening our friendship and cooperation between our countries. With this understanding, we have launched the Türkiye-U.S. Strategic Mechanism. I hope that in the upcoming period, we will resolve our problems while developing our cooperation with the U.S. on the basis of mutual interests

The support we have been giving through the steps we have taken as a strong and reliable NATO ally is known by all of you. I point out on every occasion that this brutal war, which has completed its seventh month in the region, will have no winner, and that its global economic repercussions are adversely affecting the whole world. Everyone appreciates the steps, which we have taken regarding the grain corridor through Istanbul agreement and which aim at less-developed or poor countries rather than the developed countries.

As Türkiye we will continue in the period ahead our efforts in order for the war to be brought to an end through diplomacy and for its regional and global repercussions to be overcome. Istanbul agreement, which was reached as a result of our efforts, together with the United Nations, aimed at exporting the Ukrainian grain over the Black Sea, is the most concrete example of our endeavors. We want to transform the positive climate we have achieved here into a ceasefire firstly, and then into lasting peace. I believe we will inshallah manage to do that as well with the sincere support of our friends and the international community

Today, Türkiye acts determinedly to defend its rights in the Aegean, the Black Sea and the Eastern Mediterranean. Today, Türkiye has a strong army and diplomacy. Today, Türkiye embraces and protects over 4 million oppressed and wronged people, who have taken shelter in itself, and thus has become the conscience of the humanity. Türkiye does not let refugees drown in the waters of the Aegean or the Mediterranean. On the contrary, we collect them from the seas. Today, Türkiye works for peace in the world and get results, and thus has become a country with a political efficiency,

Our aim is to create an environment of peace in our region and beyond in a spirit of enterprising diplomacy which focusses on human and humanitarian values

In this regard, we exert intensive efforts in order for the conflicts in Ukraine to be brought to an end through diplomacy. We maintain a fruitful cooperation with the United Nations and the parties for the shipment of the Ukrainian grain. We also exert sincere efforts in order for the grain to be delivered to those who need it the most, particularly our brothers and sisters in Africa.

We have put our relations with countries, with which we had disagreements over certain matters, back on track on the basis of win-win and mutual respect. We have highlighted Türkiye’s mediator role in a much more robust manner in the Russia-Ukraine war. We have given our country a say and influence over regional and global matters, and elevated it to a strategic position that holds the key to solution. In a turbulent region with constant conflicts and instabilities, Türkiye’s diplomatic, economic and military accomplishments stand out impressively

The Russia-Ukraine war, one of the most important crises in the world, still rages on with its implications for the whole humanity along with our country.  It has been witnessed by all that we as Türkiye have exerted every effort in order to first prevent this war and then to find a peaceful solution to it. It is thanks to our efforts that a mechanism to avert a grain crisis has been established. Given that Russia and Ukraine produce more than one third of world’s grain, even starting the shipment of the Ukrainian grain to the world through Türkiye is a critical development.”

“We continue our efforts in order for our country’s balanced, peaceful and solution-oriented approach in the Russia-Ukraine crisis to have positive repercussions in other areas as well in the days to come. On August 5 in Sochi, I and Mr. Putin had had the opportunity to thoroughly discuss the bilateral relations, other regional developments, and of course the Ukraine war besides this issue. And last Thursday, I went to Ukraine, where I had a similar meeting with Mr. Zelensky with the participation of UN Secretary-General Mr. Guterres. Our goal is to bring Mr. Putin and Mr. Zelensky together in our country in the not too distant future and pave the way for a permanent solution to this crisis

I offered my condolences on the behalf of my country about last night’s missile attack on a dormitory in Kharkiv which killed nine civilians and wounded 35 persons. We also voiced our concerns regarding the conflicts taking place around Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant. We don’t want to experience another Chernobyl. As Türkiye, we exert efforts for the termination of the conflicts by diplomatic means while also continuing to stand by our Ukrainian friends

We have dispatched 98 truckloads of humanitarian aid to meet the needs of the Ukrainian people and have provided temporary shelter to nearly 325 thousand Ukrainians in our country since the beginning of the war. We have admitted into our country a total of 1507 people comprising 1099 orphans and 408 guardians. We have also addressed the magnitude of the physical destruction caused by the war in Ukraine. I told Mr. Zelensky that we will continue to provide the necessary support for Ukraine’s reconstruction

As you know, we as the UN, Ukraine, Russia and Türkiye conducted an exemplary work of historic importance a month ago. Not only Ukraine but the entire world has started to feel the positive repercussions of the Istanbul deal, which enables the safe export of the Ukrainian grain to the world markets via the Black Sea.

“We focused on the steps that can be taken in order for the existing mechanism to keep functioning in an increasingly more effective manner. We discussed the opportunities for the positive atmosphere stemming from the Istanbul Agreement to be transformed into a lasting peace. We underscored that the international community should assume more responsibility for the revival of the diplomatic process.

Mr. Zelensky and Mr. Guterres are actually of the same opinion on this issue. It is all about finding out the shortest and fairest pathway to the negotiating table. I believe that it is possible to revive the negotiations based on the parameters that emerged in March in Istanbul. We stand ready to provide every kind of support in this regard and to play once again a facilitating or mediating role. We also discussed during our meeting the issue of prisoners of war as well as our relevant initiatives. Let me stress the importance we attach to this issue. I think those now watching us wonder about the exchange of prisoners of war. We will continue to discuss with Mr. Putin and the Russian side the outcomes of today’s talks.