We have just taken a historic decision with the sixth sanctions package with an embargo on 90% of Russian oil. We want to increase financial and military support for Ukraine. And finally, we want to do everything we can to get grain out of Ukraine. The Ukrainian people are fighting bravely, they deserve our support and respect. Arms deliveries to Ukraine are continuing

"The situation is worrying, it's true. That's why I've put so much time and energy into it. I have lost count of the conversations I have had with Vladimir Putin since December. In all, about a hundred hours in transparency and at the request of Volodymyr Zelenskyy. We must not humiliate Russia so that the day the fighting stops, we can build a way out through diplomatic channels. I am convinced that it is France's role to be a mediating power

made a historic and fundamental mistake for his people, for himself and for history

Russia is still a great people. I think he has isolated himself. It is one thing to isolate yourself, but it is difficult to get out of it

We will have a peace to build tomorrow, let us never forget that

We will have to do this with Ukraine and Russia around the table. The end of the discussion and the negotiation will be set by Ukraine and Russia. But it will not be done in denial, nor in exclusion of each other, nor even in humiliation.

never give in to the temptation either of humiliation or of a spirit of revenge

The European Union, given the level of its integration and ambition, cannot be in the short term the only means of structuring the European continent

It’s our historic obligation to respond to that today and to create what I would call a European political community. This new European organisation would allow European democratic nations adhering to our core values to find a new space for co-operation on politics, security, energy, transport, infrastructure investments and the movement of people, especially the young

Countries that refuse to take a side in Russia’s war in Ukraine are “complicit” with Moscow’s “new imperialism

Those who are silent today are serving — whether against their will or secretly with a certain complicity — the cause of a new imperialism

return to the age of imperialism and colonies” and said the world faced a choice between “war and peace.

I want to say things quite clearly today: Those who want to mimic the struggle of the nonaligned in refusing to express themselves clearly are making a mistake and this will carry a historic responsibility,

We must protect our European brothers by proposing a new balance capable of preserving their sovereignty and peace,

This must be done while respecting Russia and understanding the contemporary traumas of this great people and great nation

"Russia, a permanent member of the Security Council, through an act of aggression and invasion and annexation, broke our collective security … when it deliberately violated the UN Charter and the principle of sovereign equality of states

“The longer this war goes on, the more it threatens Europe and the world. It could lead to greater conflict where security and sovereignty no longer depend on the strength of alliances, but on the strength of armed groups... and subjugation of others

What we have seen is a return to the age of imperialism. France rejects this and will steadfastly search for peace.”

the war “is undermining the principle of our Organization, is undermining the only possible world order, is undermining peace.

“because it is only by working together that we can find peace

“They are wrong. they are making a historic error.

“Those who are keeping silent today are, in a way, complicit with the cause of a new imperialism.... that is trampling the current order.”

 “because over and beyond war, there’s a risk of dividing the world

“to act so that Russia rejects the path of war and assesses the cost for itself and for all of us — and, really, bring an end to this act of aggression.

“These are all things that we need to address urgently. Many of these problems are caused by divisions between us and therefore our shared responsibility must be to help the most vulnerable to cope with these challenges

Democracy is being called into question before our eyes,

the war must be an opportunity for Europe, which has “shown remarkable unity”, to become a “power of peace”.

We are all aware, as well, that negotiations will only be successful if Ukraine is liberated and its sovereignty is protected

"Russia must now see that it cannot impose its will militarily even if there are fake pretend referenda in the territories that have been bombed and occupied.

"Those who are silent now on this new imperialism, or are secretly complicit with it, show a new cynicism that is tearing down the global order without which peace is not possible,

The ball is now in Iran's court to say whether or not it accepts the conditions that have been formally proposed by the Americans and the Europeans

"I've been clear on the framework and you can't play with trust and security

"We must prepare for a long war,

"European unity is key because division is one of Russia's war objectives

We are not participating in the war, we do not want to

"But we cannot let Russia win this war militarily by gaining territory and, at the same time, showing the defeat of the international order and our values on the basis of an aggression,

"France will continue to talk to Russia.

Who wants Turkey to be the only power in the world which continues to talk to Russia?

The job of a diplomat is to talk to everyone, especially to people with whom we do not agree

"And so we will continue to do so, in coordination with our allies.

We will respond without weakness to this act of war, with calm, determination and unity

"In the military, economic and energy domains we will be without weakness

By going back on his word and refusing the diplomatic path and choosing war, President Putin not only decided to attack Ukraine, he decided to tarnish the whole sovereignty of Ukraine

He decided to inflict the most significant damage on peace and stability in Europe for decades

We cannot let Russia militarily win the war,

We must not let Europe get divided

People of France, 
My fellow citizens,

Since President Putin’s brutal attack on Ukraine on February 24, Russian forces have been shelling Kyiv and besieging major cities. Hundreds of Ukrainian civilians have been killed. Women and children were killed today. The days to come will most likely be increasingly difficult. Hundreds of thousands of refugees are fleeing to Moldova, Poland, Romania, Hungary, Slovakia, and gradually to the rest of Europe.

In the midst of a difficult moment unlike any we have seen in decades, we stand with Ukraine. 

This evening I want to pay tribute to the courage of the Ukrainian people, who are resisting under fire. 

And on your behalf, I want to offer France’s brotherly support to President Volodymyr Zelensky. As the leader of an extraordinarily courageous people, he embodies honor, freedom and heroism. 

Neither France nor Europe nor Ukraine nor the Atlantic Alliance wanted this war. 

On the contrary, we did everything we could to avoid it. 

As you know, I have been engaged in a rigorous, continuous dialogue with President Putin since 2017. 

Amid worsening tensions, I traveled to Moscow and Kyiv on February 7 and 8 to seek alternatives to armed conflict. Several other European leaders supported that effort. As for the President of the United States, he expressed his willingness to negotiate after meeting with President Putin in person last June in Geneva. 

It was therefore deliberately and alone that President Putin opted for war, rejecting the commitments he had made to the international community one after another. 

This war is not a conflict between NATO and the West, on one hand, and Russia on the other, as some have written. NATO has no troops or bases in Ukraine. These are lies. Russia has not been attacked. It is the aggressor. 

Still less is this war a fight against “Nazism,” as a baseless propaganda campaign would have people believe. That is a lie. It is an insult to Russian and Ukrainian history and to the memory of our forefathers who fought side by side against Nazism. Russian leaders are attacking the memory of the Holocaust in Ukraine, just as in Russia they are attacking the memory of Stalinist crimes. 

This war is the result of a revenge mentality fueled by a revisionist interpretation of European history that would have us return to the darkest days of empires, invasions and exterminations. 

France and Europe responded immediately, unanimously and firmly to this flagrant violation of a European nation’s territorial integrity and sovereignty. We did so in close coordination with the British, the Canadians, the Americans, the Japanese, and many other counties. 

First, we supported the Ukrainian people by providing them with humanitarian conveys and shipments of defense equipment and material. 
Then, we worked with other nations to ensure that Russian leaders understand that choosing war will result in their country being shunned by other nations and condemned by history. The UN Security Council voted on a resolution deploring Moscow’s violations of international law, and this afternoon, the UN General Assembly voted overwhelmingly to condemn the attack. In other words, the international community demonstrated its unity. Russian teams were excluded from major international competitions and many sporting and cultural events were cancelled. We are working relentlessly to convince nations on every continent to condemn the invasion, demand a ceasefire and respect humanitarian operations on Ukrainian soil, and we will continue to do so. 

We swiftly adopted proportionate sanctions against Russia and its leaders. The assets of several hundred Russians close to the authorities were frozen in France and abroad. Several major Russian banks were excluded from the international payment system, making a number of transactions impossible and causing the ruble to crash. Russian propaganda outlets were just barred from broadcasting in Europe. 

On the ground, we have made sure we have the ability to protect our citizens, moving our Embassy in Ukraine to a different city and enabling all French or dual citizens to swiftly leave the country if they wish to do so. On your behalf, I want to thank all of the diplomats, police officers, soldiers and government employees who are continuing to carry out this effort and are looking after our fellow citizens in Moldova and at Ukraine’s main border crossings.
 
I also want to thank all the journalists who are courageously covering this conflict and helping to guarantee freedom of information for all the world’s citizens. 

Finally, we took part in the NATO effort to protect the security and sovereignty of our European allies by boosting our existing military presence in the Baltic states and in the region. Several hundred French troops arrived in Romania yesterday as part of that effort. 

We will continue to step up our diplomatic initiatives, sanctions against Russia’s political and business leaders, and support for the Ukrainian people with the goal of ending the fighting. 

And yet it must be said that we are not at war with Russia. We are mindful of our deep connections with the Russian people – one of the great peoples of Europe – who sacrificed so much during World War II to save Europe from the abyss. We stand with all Russians who refuse to allow an unworthy war to be waged in their name, and who have made it clear in Russia and abroad that they have a sense of responsibility and the courage to defend peace. 

That is why I am not only in constant contact with President Zelensky but have also chosen to remain in contact with President Putin and will continue to do so as long as I am able and as long as it is necessary. To try time and again to convince him to lay down his weapons, to help with the negotiations under way insofar as France is able and, insofar as we are able, to prevent this conflict from seeping and spreading into other areas.

This war has already upset the balance on our continent and in multiple aspects of our daily lives and this balance stands to undergo major changes in the coming months. 

This war will shake up our Europe. I will talk more about this in a moment. 

Several hundred thousand refugees from Ukraine are currently being welcomed on our continent and this will continue to be the case. France will do its part. I’d like to take this opportunity to thank our cities and towns for leaping into action. I’d also like to thank our nonprofits, which are working hard to welcome these refugees in the best possible conditions. 

We are making preparations and will take care of the men and women who come to our country seeking protection. France will also do its part by welcoming children forced into exile after being separated from fathers who have stayed behind to fight. And we will do so in close collaboration with the nonprofits and NGOs that are already at work on the ground and in France. 

Our agricultural system, our industries and many of our business sectors are suffering and will continue to suffer either because they are dependent on raw materials imported from Russia and Ukraine or because they export products to those countries. Our growth, which has reached its highest point, will undoubtedly be affected. 

Hikes in the price of oil, gas and raw materials are impacting our purchasing power and this will continue to be the case. In the days to come, the cost of filling the tank, paying our heating bills and purchasing certain products will likely grow even steeper. 

Faced with these economic and social consequences, there is just one thing that guides me and will guide me moving forward: protecting you.

We will support those business sectors with the greatest exposure by searching for new suppliers and new business opportunities. That is why I have raised this issue with my American, European and Middle Eastern counterparts. 

We will provide appropriate responses to trade disruptions and price increases. I have also asked the Prime Minister to draft an economic and social resiliency plan over the next few days in response to these difficulties. 

But make no mistake. The consequences of these events will be felt not only in the near term over the course of the coming weeks. They also signal the start of a new era.

War in Europe is no longer limited to our history books and our textbooks. It is here now, right before our eyes. 

Democracy is no longer viewed as an undisputed system. It has been called into question right before our eyes.

Our freedom and the freedom of our children are no longer a given. Now more than ever, they require courage and the willingness to fight for them at all times.

We must meet history’s sudden return to tragedy with historic decisions. 

Therefore, our country will increase investments in our defense that were decided upon in 2017 and will pursue its strategy founded on independence and investments in our economy, research and innovation, which have already been strengthened in light of the pandemic.

First and foremost, it must become an economic power. We can no longer depend on others to feed us, take care of us, inform us or fund us. That is why, in keeping with the decisions made during the darkest days of the pandemic with the Recovery Plan for Europe, we must promote a new economic model founded on independence and progress. 

Next, it must become an energy power. When it comes to our mobility, heating and the powering of our plants, we can no longer depend on others and, in particular, on Russian gas. That is why, after deciding to develop renewable energy and build new nuclear reactors for France, I will champion an independent European energy strategy. 

Lastly, it must become a power for peace. We can no longer depend on others to defend us, be it on land, at sea, under the sea, in the air, in space or in cyberspace. To this end, our European defense must step up. 

My fellow citizens,

The war in Ukraine marks a turning point for our continent and our generation. 

I know how understandably upset this war has made you. It spurs us on to action and compels us to make decisions. I will keep you informed. 

This war also impacts our democratic life and our election campaign, which is set to officially begin at the end of this week. 

This campaign will allow for a democratic debate that is important for France. However, it will not prevent us from agreeing on what is essential. 

I know that I can count on you and your commitment to freedom, equality, fraternity and France’s role in the world. 

I will never stop defending these values and holding them high, in your name. 

Russia has already started to cut off gas supplies

"That's a very clear message: It will use gas as a weapon of war

We will need do without Russian gas completely

"We want to stop this war without going to war ourselves

We need to enter a collective logic of restraint,"

"by making sure that we consume less energy".

this restraint will require solidarity from our fellow citizens

for the climate and also for our energy independence

"Nuclear energy is a sustainable solution

"both for France and for other countries

At the close of this Versailles Summit, President Charles Michel and President Ursula von der Leyen have just expressed the spirit of our debates and conclusions perfectly. We are here in this Galerie des Batailles, and although some people thought that war in our region was history, for the past 15 days, the choice of Russia, of President Putin, has been to bring back war in Europe. In the face of this war and this unbelievable violence inflicted by Russia on Ukraine and its people, and a tragic turning point for our history, we all, I believe, are fully aware that it is also a turning point for our societies, our peoples and our European project. For the past 15 days, we have responded, as President Michel and President von der Leyen have just said, with unity, speed and a spirit of responsibility. Decisions were made swiftly, as a bloc of 27, with our institutions, and coordinated with all our partners within the framework of NATO and the G7, and with diplomatic work enabling us to isolate Russia, particularly in the UN General Assembly, as recently seen.

For two weeks, Ukrainian men and women have been fighting courageously to defend their freedom, democracy, their sovereignty, and the integrity of their territory. Europeans have had a clear position: unanimous and strong condemnation of Russian aggression in all international forums, and we have acted accordingly, including with the resolution adopted and victory in the UN General Assembly. We decided on unprecedented support for Ukraine, by together providing equipment, humanitarian assistance, but also weapons. We have today proposed that another €500 million be added to the European Peace Facility so that even more can be done in this regard. And countries which to date have had a tradition of neutrality at the table – I am thinking of Sweden – have decided for the first time in so many decades to participate in this tangible support for Ukraine. In addition to economic support, we will continue to provide humanitarian support by welcoming more than two million refugees. President von der Leyen reiterated the importance of this solidarity, and I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the peoples of Poland, the Slovak Republic, Romania and Hungary, within our Union, but also the people of Moldova, for their outpouring of solidarity and humanity. As I said before, France will do its share and I hope that our solidarity mechanisms will be fully activated in this approach. On day one, we swiftly imposed massive, unprecedented sanctions. European decisions to impose unprecedented sanctions were also made on the second, fourth and sixth days of conflict. And we are ready to impose more sanctions, swiftly and massively. All options are on the table and the aim of our discussions is to prepare these sanctions to stop the aggression and prepare ourselves as well for all the consequences in the weeks and months ahead.

Of course our main objective is still a rapid return to peace, beginning with a ceasefire, followed by a rapid withdrawal of Russian troops. That is why we continue to exert pressure on Russia and we are pursuing demanding dialogue, particularly with the Federal Chancellor of Germany. This support, this solidarity for Ukraine, is also what we actively pursued yesterday. We today support Ukraine and we will support it for as long as the war goes on. And we will be there to rebuild what Russia’s brutal and unjustified action has destroyed, and to heal the wounds, rebuild and help Ukraine get back on its feet and thrive over the long term. The message we have sent Ukrainians is that the path to our Europe is open to them. Their fight for freedom and democracy, for the values that bring us together, has shown that Ukraine really belongs to our European family. We have also wanted the applications of Moldova and Georgia to be examined as provided for by treaties, by the European Commission, so that the acceptability of their candidacy and the potential opening can be treated in compliance with our treaties.

The Versailles Declaration, and the Versailles agenda that we discussed today, just acknowledged the fact that European sovereignty – although a few years back some may have seen it as a slogan and some as a French fantasy – everyone now understands that it is a necessity. They also understand that we began experiencing the importance of this sovereignty, this strategic autonomy in the pandemic when we had to obtain health equipment and materials. We experienced it when we had to manufacture and provide vaccines for ourselves and countries we wished to help. We experienced it when we were emerging from the crisis, when we were recovering, when we realized that it was complicated to obtain semi-conductors whose production we had delegated to the other side of the world, to get the production of automobiles and other products going again. We have clearly seen this with this crisis in which we realize to what extent our food, our energy and our defence are sovereignty issues, in which we can cooperate, in which we wish to be a power that is open to the world, but in which we wish to choose our partners and not depend on them. That is what sovereignty means. It does not mean protectionism. It does not mean closing oneself off. It means having the possibility to remain open without being dependent. Therefore, the Versailles agenda provided direction for the months ahead to achieve this goal.

With regard to defence, we hope to be able to define the investments we need. Several of us are now investing 2% of our Gross National Product in defence, others still have to do more. But we wish to move forward in a coordinated matter, identify our needs in budgetary terms, identify what capabilities we need to build, identify our needs with regard to possible new areas of conflict – space, maritime or cyber – and identify what makes sense to build in terms of European manufacturing sectors. It does not make sense in terms of sovereignty to have a Europe that spends more on defence by importing more materials from other places. We must continue with certain partnerships, but we must also decide to consolidate and build defence manufacturing sectors with fewer standards, but which are in line with a fully integrated market. To do so, we have made several decisions. As you know, since 2017 France has made massive budgetary choices to reach its 2% investment last year and greatly revitalize its sectors and its capabilities. Germany decided approximately ten days ago to move forward on historic investments for its country. Denmark has also made a historic choice, that of submitting to its people, in a few months, the possibility of returning to the European defence and security project. As you see, all across our continent, historic choices are being made which mark a major turning point. We need to get organized at the European level to build these joint defence capabilities. This is the mandate given to the Commission so that by May and within the framework of what most likely will be an extraordinary Council meeting, ahead of the NATO Summit in June, to craft a fully established European strategy when it comes to investment and bolstering production capacity.

Next, there is the issue of energy. Already through our climate strategy we have started building a path of independence. Moving away from fossil fuels means becoming independent. Nonetheless, we knew that for a lot of us, this path, and particularly the phasing out of coal, would involve gas. Gas that we import, and which we still import from Russia. The situation that we are experiencing today, and which we will undoubtedly experience in the future, must force us to re-evaluate this strategy by being even more ambitious at the climate level. As such, we will hold a meeting at the end of March where we will look very concretely at how to support our people on the matter of prices. That is the mandate which is also given to the Commission, for concrete options on prices, for concrete options on filling. These are very technical subjects, but what are we ultimately talking about? Of guaranteeing mechanisms that help avoid being subjected to market fluctuations, sometimes speculation, linked to this crisis. A lot of us have made decisions to protect our compatriots and companies already. We must harmonize these choices at the European level, and equip ourselves with new instruments in the next two weeks, to better resist the price shock linked to this geopolitical context. Prices were already rising before the war, and they continue to rise because of it. Next, we must also prepare for any potential sanctions that may arise, and prepare to desensitize ourselves from this dependence on Russia. That is the purpose given for the month of May to the Commission with this plan, the importance of which has been reiterated by the Presidents of the Commission and the Council: a plan to phase out fossil dependency regarding Russia, in other words how to phase out by 2027 from our dependency on Russian gas, oil and coal. This is a plan that requires new investments, new equipment, a strategy that will strengthen the choice we made, particularly in the area of renewables and nuclear energy. As you can see, March and May will be structured by a rich agenda on the energy level.

Third lever: we will have national public investment strategies to protect us from the consequences of the war, to finance our solidarity and our resistance to these consequences, but also to finance these sovereignty strategies. Fourth point: we, as Europeans, will also have to finance, as we did during the pandemic, these major strategies that I have just mentioned, and do so because we are speaking about investments for our future, whether we are talking about joint investment, as it is important for us to coordinate these investments, and we should also finance this as Europeans to avoid any fragmentation of the financial market and European sovereign debt. That is the strategy that we have begun to work on here, and which we will be working on in the coming months. But we will also need to show unity, speed and a spirit of responsibility.

The Ukrainian people are giving us a unique example, that of courage. We Europeans are not at war today with Russia. But as I said, we support Ukraine, and sanction Russia, but we must also do our part, and have the courage to make historic decisions, accept the fact that defending democracy and our values comes with a cost, and choosing independence has a cost, requiring us to sometimes go back on the dogmas that we have had for many years, and on an organization and habits that we had. I think I can say that the discussions we held yesterday and today have sanctioned the realization and willingness of Europeans here in Versailles to move forward in this direction. I will conclude with these words: yesterday I launched our work by thanking some of my colleagues, and I want to say it to the President of the Commission, because Versailles, which is a great site of history that French people dearly love, and which is a source of pride around the world, has also sometimes been a place that has echoed diplomatic defeats. It is also the place where we lost peace at the end of World War I. After winning the war, we lost peace because at that moment we acknowledged a desire to humiliate and divide Europe. I am very proud that in the past two days, despite the difficulty, seriousness, heaviness and sometimes extreme emotion that we experienced around the table, together, and unanimously, we have decided that the only way to preserve peace on our continent, is in our unity. It is the courage of this unity. That is the most important in my view. Thank you.

This united response in solidarity in the face of the Russian aggression against Ukraine has not distracted us from the priorities we had set. Climate and migration challenges and geopolitical and public health circumstances required an ambitious programme. We stuck to it. As announced by France, the success of our Presidency was to be judged on its priorities, which will shape its future in so many ways: the fight against climate change, the promotion of social rights and the regulation of digital giants

Tensions on the food market are more exacerbated than ever in the context of the war in Ukraine. If unaddressed, the tensions in fertilizers access in vulnerable countries could lead to significant harvest losses which would significantly worsen the food insecurity situation at the global scale. 
It is therefore with a sense of urgency that a high-level meeting was convened by France in the margins of the 77th session of the United Nations General Assembly. At this occasion, we, France, Senegal acting as chair of the African Union, the African Union Commission, the European Commission, the President of the Council of Ministers of the Lebanese Republic, in the presence of the heads of UNCTAD, the WFP, the FAO, IFAD, the World Bank Group, the IMF, the WTO and Afreximbank agreed to launch a new initiative, “Save Crops Operation”, to promote access to fertilizers and other critical inputs in vulnerable countries:

It is this difficult backdrop that has made the war started by Russia in Ukraine more tragic. Let me explain. There is a growing interdependence of our economies and our public opinions with the rest of the world because of the innovations that I have just mentioned, and which have profoundly changed our societies and our democracies. Our economies are open and interdependent. Our people travel, and therefore our countries are interdependent in every respect and we are connected with the rest of the world. We compare, we know, we are informed. This all makes for huge changes for our countries and the established order. We have experienced this directly with the pandemic that put the entire world on hold and disrupted all the value chains all at once, over the long term, a pandemic that has spread incredibly fast, which is the result of the globalization that we had been experiencing. And as I said, this pandemic over time has broken up the value chains – and I will come back to this point – and has plunged 78 million global citizens into poverty.

It is in this context that Russia’s war against Ukraine and the return of war to European soil, takes a very particular shape and I believe is a time of deep transformation for us, our continent and the international order. The invasion of Ukraine by Russia is a break away from the past because it directly affects our security in the context I have just mentioned. It violates and undermines the principles upon which we built peace over decades: the territorial integrity of States, their sovereign equality, the United Nations Charter. It makes international crisis resolution even more difficult because of the deep divide in the United Nations Security Council and the deconstruction of the treaties and frameworks of our security architecture. So it compounds what was already underway.

The first place to pursue this goal is of course Ukraine, where Russia is waging its war. I will very clearly enumerate the goals of our diplomatic effort.

The first goal is to help Ukraine in this this conflict that has been foisted on it. To help Ukraine in economic and humanitarian terms, and by delivering weapons that will help it confront the aggression and defend its territory, and to begin work on rebuilding the country right now. This is a simple goal, from a mind-set I made clear from the outset: we are not taking part in the war. We have no wish to take part in the war. We cannot let Russia win this war militarily and conquer territories, which would show defeat of our values and the international order through an aggression.

We want to establish conditions that will enable Ukraine, at a time of its choosing, to either achieve a military victory or a negotiated peace, in terms that would not simply be those it would be forced to accept if we abandoned it to its fate. That is our top goal: helping Ukraine for that purpose, and with that kind of determination. I must say that the assistance provided to Ukraine by the United States, European countries and certain others, along with the courage of its people and the strength of its army, have made the situation very different from what many top experts anticipated a few months ago, and especially – I think I can say this – very different from what Russia anticipated.

The second goal we need is that of maintaining European unity. We must not let Europe be divided in the face of this war. That is a challenge every day, as we do not have the same past experiences with Russia, because we do not have the same histories with Russia in our Europe. When we held the Presidency of the Council of the European Union, I was attentive to this point, but it is a daily challenge for us all. We cannot allow Europe to be divided or to align in a way with the most warlike, which would run the risk of an extension of the conflict and a total closure of lines of communication. Nor can we consider that we could allow certain European States on our eastern flank to carry out actions alone. The European Union is key. And if I may, dividing Europe is one of Russia’s war goals. So it is precisely our responsibility to preserve the European Union and its strength in these circumstances.

